Growing steel demand<separator> Societies around the world continue to develop and generate economic growth, leading to the increasing construction of large cities, infrastructure, technologies, and consumer goods. The demand for steel is, therefore, projected to continue growing by approximately a third by 2050. If no low-emissions processes are adopted, we will see a similar trend for resulting greenhouse gas emissions. Even if we implement and scale new technologies quickly, we thus cannot stop emissions from growing without addressing the growing steel demand. <separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator> To successfully transition to low-emissions steel production, companies need access to different low-emissions energy sources and raw materials. Depending on the production routes chosen, both the iron- and the steelmaking processes can require large amounts of natural gas, renewable energy, green hydrogen, biomass, high-quality iron ore, and scrap for their low-emissions production. These resources also need to be relatively cheap to make the transition and production affordable. We currently see the demand for such resources increasing across industries, leading to supply shortages and higher prices. <separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Steel Recycling Capacity<separator> A major opportunity to reduce emissions is through recycling (i.e. secondary steel production), when previously used steel (i.e. “scrap”) is reclaimed and remelted, instead of producing steel from raw materials (i.e. primary steel production) through the highly carbon-intensive ironmaking process. Steel recycling can reduce 1.5 metric tonnes of CO2 per metric tonne of scrap used in steel production, and also save other resources such as coal, limestone, and energy.Scrap availability depends on a system of efficient recollection, separation and sorting of steel at the end of a product's lifetime. Scrap can either be re-melted and retrofitted to become a new product, or it can be reused directly depending on its quality. The steel industry has been limited by the lack of holistic and efficient scrap collection and sorting systems - including a lack of documentation and labeling of products - to create a circular economy, preventing closed loop recycling. Without such a system, high-quality steel scrap is frequently being remelted together with low-quality or even contaminated scrap, resulting in an end product characterized by low quality.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Profit Margins<separator> Producing green or low-emissions steel generally requires different resources, new technologies, and infrastructure, which requires significant investments. Steel producers generally operate with low profit margins, making the internal financing of such endeavors rather difficult. This is exacerbated by continued global steel overcapacity. To afford such investments, owners are often dependent on external financing, loans, and/or subsidies for new steel plants. At the same time, many owners are still paying back their loans from current steel plants and will, therefore, find it hard to get additional financial resources. While low-emissions steel demand is growing, it is currently too low to provide market security for many steel plant operators. It creates a feedback loop, in which little demand for low-emissions steel leads to little production, keeping prices of low-emissions steel high, resulting in a reinforced low demand for the low-emissions product. Low profit margins mean that there is a higher dependency for external funding to invest in decarbonization, making it a challenge to their green transition.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator> A lack of demand and market security for low-emissions steel results in low levels of production. With little supply and without the benefits of the economies of scale, low-emissions and green steel prices increase, making it more difficult to find buyers and remain profitable. Without customers that are interested in buying low-emissions steel, or that are willing to pay for the higher prices associated with it, a transition may result in declining profitability for steel producers. This makes a decision towards sustainable production less likely. The lack of market security could also make it impossible to fund a green steel venture in the first place: Because the cost of construction for new plants is very high, most steel companies are dependent on significant amounts of capital from investors. They, however, are unlikely to invest in low-emissions steel if it is unsure that such projects become profitable.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator> It is estimated that the initial green premium associated with low-emissions ironmaking is between 15-40% of the original production cost. Because this additional cost exceeds many steel companies’ profit margins, such endeavor is only possible if they can sell the low-emissions steel at higher prices. Within such a competitive globalized market, this will put producers at risk, as they will be competing with cheaper carbon-intensive steel. The combination of market insecurity and low competitiveness creates a “first-movers disadvantage”. If manufacturers are unsure if they can sell the low-emission steel for a higher price, they will be unlikely to invest in low-emissions steel production, delaying the transition.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Excessive Government Intervention<separator> For many decades, governments around the world have intervened in the steel industry to ensure their country has large amounts of steel capacity. Such interventions include plant ownership, the provision of low-interest loans, grants, tax benefits, and excessive subsidies. Even though this effectively caused the growth of steel capacity, the growth was not market-based and can create unnatural advantages for inefficient technologies like higher emissions and energy intensive steelmaking capacity. Therefore, the global supply now significantly exceeds the global demand, a phenomenon called “overcapacity”. With a current global overcapacity of around 25% and growing, the average steel plant is operating at a level of production lower than needed to avoid economic losses. Additionally, government intervention makes economic incentives and regulations less effective.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Overcapacity<separator> The global steel supply now significantly exceeds the global demand, a phenomenon called “overcapacity”. Overcapacity causes economic losses of steel plants, international trade friction and economic inefficiency, as excess capacity causes the dumping of very cheap steel in other markets, making it more difficult for local plants to compete. The reduced profitability makes it more difficult for plant owners to afford new investments in low-emissions steel infrastructure and technologies, highlighting the importance of closing down unused and high-emission plants to reduce overcapacity and unnecessary emissions. While overcapacity may prove to be a challenge to steel decarbonization, it also provides an opportunity to support the transition as higher-emissions steel capacity can be closed immediately, without affecting overall supply and demand.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Steel Plant Construction Cost<separator> The decarbonization of the steel industry will require significant amounts of capital for new investments. The lack of capital available from low profit margins, in combination with the high costs, therefore, creates an obstacle to the transition. Some of these costs include the construction of low-emissions steel plants, the development and implementation of low-emissions technologies, the training of professionals, higher quality raw materials and renewable energy, and the construction of enabling infrastructure. The accumulation of costs, all of which are greater than the traditional carbon-heavy route without substantially increasing profits, makes it challenging to afford a transition without external upfront investment.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Lifetime and Reinvestment Cycles<separator> A steel plant requires reinvestment after around 20-25 years to achieve its average lifetime of 40 years. To afford the initial construction or relining of steel plants, many owners are dependent on external financing or loans. Getting a return on the initial investments can then take 15 to 20 years. It is these long lifetimes that cause a very slow turnover of steel facilities, reinforced by steel overcapacity, which lessens new construction. Investment decisions are generally made toward the end of a plant’s lifetime or before the reinvestment cycle. At that point, it is the expected profitability of carbon-heavy versus low-emissions steel - as well as the existing technologies available or regulations in place - that determine if a plant owner continues with the current production route or switches.  Around 71% of all existing BF-BOF plants will reach the end of their lifetime before 2030. We should thus aim to make it more profitable to switch to low-emissions steel routes that year at the latest.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Access to Financial Resources<separator> Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an investment of USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. To encourage such institutions to invest in the steel industry, there are several factors we need to address: We should increase the profitability of green steel, ensure access to finances is guaranteed despite potentially poor credit histories if the industry is asked to shut down BF-BOF plants before achieving profitability, and create market security to ensure returns on investment. Lastly, we should identify how to reduce investment risks from the focused upfront costs.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator> Around 50% of all global steel plants will require refurbishment or new investments in infrastructure before 2030. This provides us with a critical juncture: a point in time in which the decisions made will determine the future pathway of steel production. The technologies available, their affordability, and their effectiveness will dictate if they will be implemented by the time of reinvestment, or if investors decide to stick with carbon-heavy technologies. At the moment, however, many technologies are still under development and not yet scalable. By 2050, the adoption of Best Available Technologies and breakthrough technologies could reduce around 90% of the industry’s direct emissions, if the expected maturity timelines for new technologies are met. Around 25% of emissions reductions are expected to be achieved from two technologies alone, hydrogen-based DRI (ironmaking) and carbon capture and storage, even though the feasibility and economic practicality of the latter is still in question. That makes green hydrogen and CCUS two essential technologies to develop as fast as possible. However, each steel plant will have its own decarbonization pathway, therefore it is important that we develop a larger repertoire of technologies that enable decarbonization across contexts.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator> Several technologies, like CCUS, green hydrogen and electricity production, and Best Available Technologies technologies are deemed necessary for the transition, but are not alone sufficient to achieve it: They require certain infrastructure to exist to be used. CCUS is dependent on access to geological spaces in which the emissions can be stored. Therefore, a plant needs to have a suitable underground site within reach, as well as the necessary infrastructure to transport the emissions. Hydrogen, too, requires infrastructure, including hydrogen production-, storage-, and distribution facilities. All of them will need to be expanded greatly. Renewable energy production facilities, too, are not sufficient for a transition if we do not prepare for high-voltage electricity transmission and storage infrastructure. Lastly, it would be possible to increase energy efficiency across industries if we were to implement localized waste heat-sharing infrastructure. If the relevant infrastructure is not within geographical proximity, it may cause the relocation of steel plants, or incentivize the continuation of carbon-intensive practices.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Trained Professionals<separator> To run low-emissions steel plants and support the construction and functioning of enabling factors - such as enabling infrastructure - we need qualified staff.  Low-emissions steel facilities use novel technologies and infrastructure, the use of which needs to be learned. Additionally, the absence of necessary infrastructure and resources could force some steel companies to relocate to more favorable locations. Without past exposure and opportunities to work within the steel industry, new locations may have a shortage of qualified employees, providing a challenge for facilities. Professionals, therefore, need the right training, which itself requires some long-term planning to educate, recruit, (re)train, and employ a sufficient number of people for the right positions.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Green Steel Definition<separator> Not every country has yet set standards for low-emissions steel, or even defined what constitutes a “green” steel production. However, having internationally harmonized definitions and standards could help us greatly in the transition, as it would allow us to set investment principles, regulations, and decarbonization policies that promote a net-zero steel production pathway. Without a clear and enforced definition, the industry allows steel with slightly fewer carbon emissions - although still being far from net zero - to be labeled as green steel. This reduces the effectiveness of market incentives, as consumers and investors are dealing with imperfect information, struggling to identify which products have a low carbon footprint or to evaluate the price-performance ratio. With clear and internationally harmonized definitions and certifications, as well as better customer awareness, the transition could be effectively driven by policy interventions and market incentives.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Technology Standards<separator> In the renewable energy sector, agreed-upon technology standards were an important element to enable the implementation and development of the industry. Such standards included agreements regarding new technologies’ performance, reliability, and durability. A lack of standards, procedures, and guidelines created barriers to the scaling of technologies, making large-scale adoption more difficult. The steel industry can learn from other industries’ lessons and prevent similar challenges through early preparation and institutions that determine and enforce technology standards. This is particularly important now, as many steel producers started to determine their transition strategies, including the technologies they might use. Uncertainty about the acceptance and effectiveness of technologies may slow this process and hence the transition.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Bureaucratic Barriers<separator> The planning and construction of steel plants takes several years, but is frequently prolonged further by long waiting times to receive construction permits and other required licenses. As many low-emissions technologies are rather novel, the bureaucratic process and approval time may take even longer. For Carbon Capture and Storage, for example, it often requires sequestration and transportation licenses and is associated with continuous safety monitoring that may require new staff, resources, and consistent interaction with relevant government departments. While these processes and safety checks are important, we should work to reduce waiting times and excessive bureaucracy so that our emission reduction targets can be achieved.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator> Although an increasing number of countries and steel producers announced their decarbonization targets, there are few measures to ensure that such pledges are being followed by action. This poses a challenge: Often the simple announcement of ambitious climate targets improves a steel company’s access to funding and public perception, leading to a higher number of announcements in the last few years. However, there are no accountability measures that ensure that such plans are actually implemented. That makes market incentives less effective, slowing the transition. The lack of commitment to implement existing technologies additionally makes it difficult to develop incentives and punishments that could push steel producers to meet their targets in a timely manner. For a successful transition, we need to not only ensure that more companies and countries commit to timely decarbonizations but also develop accountability measures that ensure the targets are met.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

International Cooperation<separator> The largest steel producers are currently China and India. Although both countries announced plans to become carbon neutral by 2060 and 2070 respectively, they also continue to invest in new BF-BOF plants. Due to the large share of steel capacity, and consequently emissions, we cannot succeed in our global steel decarbonization efforts if there is no successful transition within China’s and India’s industries. Some countries' steel transition, therefore, should be a priority on the international political agenda. Many countries require extensive support, for example through increased access to funding, green materials, and technologies, or even with specific infrastructure developments, to kickstart their steel decarbonization. For that it will take more international cooperation targeting both the steel industry directly and enabling industries such as the renewable energy sector. Currently, we have no international agreements that determine how to transform the steel industry on a global scale. However, due to the international nature of the industry, it is difficult for one country to transition without the risk of “carbon leakage”. This risk can be avoided when changes are made internationally, also referred to as “leveling the global playing field”.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator> Transitioning to low-emissions and green steel requires certain transparency and availability of information, especially for market incentives to work effectively. Steel Producers will need to make decisions about future production pathways and investments, which requires knowledge of the long-term strategies by governments, consistency in policy actions, and awareness of future technology and infrastructure availability. Consumers and Supply Chains need to decarbonize their own supply chains, which requires awareness of the emissions inherent to the steel products they buy. There is still a lack of information about the availability of different types of low-emissions steel, perpetuated by the absence of globally harmonized green steel definitions, standards, and certification. Individuals, too, struggle to make low-emission steel a consideration in their purchasing decisions.Governments need to have an understanding of their own industry’s functioning to address the existing challenges and opportunities. When proposing the construction of a new plant, companies are often not required to report the production pathway they choose, but only how much steel they will produce once operating. That makes it difficult for governments to limit the construction of carbon-intensive steel plants or to create regulatory policies. Making a detailed decarbonization roadmap and increasing information availability should be a priority for each country. Financial Institutions need information about steel production types and the respective emissions created to make investment decisions. At the moment we see a general underreporting, and those wanting to increase financial access for low-emission companies need to rely on accurate self-reporting of emissions or some kind of low-emissions certifications.<separator> to learn more about this challenge and potential policy opportunities, click here.
  