Growing steel demand<separator>Regulators<separator>The demand for steel is projected to continue growing by approximately a third by 2050. Because of this demand, and the need of steel for military security and economic development, regulators are unlikely to ban or impose harmful restrictions to emissions-intensive steel production until low-carbon steel has a higher availability and affordability. Moreover, it is a reason for governments to continue investing and financially supporting national steel growth and independence, despite global overcapacity.

Growing steel demand<separator>Investors<separator>The demand for steel is projected to continue growing by approximately a third by 2050. Because of this demand, financial institutions are likely to continue investing in the widely available and affordable emissions-intensive steel, despite its environmental impacts.

Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>The high need for green energy causes demand to outstrip supply. This comes in addition to the already higher prices consumers have to pay for green energy due to its initial green premium. Because green energy and raw materials are more expensive but required for iron- and steel production, low-carbon steel is more expensive, and thus less competitive.

Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Investors<separator>Green energy and raw materials are a necessity for low-carbon steel production. If there is not enough to securely produce low-carbon steel, investors may be hesitant to invest in such a production (or related business proposals) in the first place.

Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Steelmaking requires large amounts of energy and raw materials. Moreover, such resources need to be relatively cheap to make the transition and production affordable. At the moment, around 60-80% of a plant’s steel production costs stem from raw material and energy input costs, both of which will likely increase due to switches to low-carbon materials and energy. However, the high demand across industries causes demand to outstrip supply. This comes in addition to the already higher prices consumers have to pay for green energy due to its initial green premium. If green energy and raw materials are not affordable, or existing in the first place, steel companies cannot transition, and are likely to, therefore, reinvest in emissions-intensive steel instead.

Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator>Some energy resources, like green hydrogen, require infrastructure, such as hydrogen production-, storage-, and distribution facilities. Given the low levels of hydrogen production, all of them will need to be expanded greatly to provide sufficient resources and bring them to the steel plants. Without the development and expansion of the energy itself, however, the interest to invest into the relevant infrastructure is low. Without the infrastructure available, however, the energy type cannot be distributed as needed. On a similar note, renewable energy production facilities are not sufficient for a transition if we do not prepare for high-voltage electricity transmission and storage infrastructure.

Steel Recycling Capacity<separator>Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Scrap can either be re-melted and retrofitted to become a new product, or it can be reused directly when still of good quality. Scrap is, therefore, a feedstock that reduces emissions by substituting emissions-intensive feedstocks like coal, and by reducing the need for primary production in the first place. However, despite the expected increase in scrap availability in the upcoming 25 years, the scrap available is finite and cannot cover the global steel demand, especially with the expected steel demand increase by 2050. This comes additionally to the current "downcycling" of steel, caused by the lack of sorting systems in place. All of this makes high-quality low-carbon feedstock scarce and more expensive.

Profit Margins<separator>Lifetime and Reinvestment Cycles<separator>The initial construction and installation of a BF-BOF plant cost approximately USD 1-1.5 billion, or USD 200-300 million per million tonnes of capacity. The reinvestment after 25 years is, on average, half of that number. To afford such investments, many owners are dependent on external financing or loans for some of these costs. And loans need to be paid back, which can take long periods of time given the small profit margin many steel companies have. Although low profit margins do not directly cause long reinvestment cycles, they make it significantly more difficult (if not impossible) to transition BF-BOF plants before the end of their lifetime.

Profit Margins<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>The steel industry has rather low levels of profit, in some countries only around 5-10%. That makes significant investments in new technologies by steel producers more difficult, causing breakthrough technologies to be developed and scaled slower than they could be.

Profit Margins<separator>Regulators<separator>The low profit margins of steel companies can limit regulators' abilities to require an immediate steel decarbonization through policy. That is, because such a requirement would (in many cases) be impossible to follow, or alternatively may cause bankruptcy and great damage to national economies. This then could also result in negative impacts on constituents' support in following elections (in political systems with elections). Without political support, however, politicians will struggle to enforce their long-term decarbonization strategies, reducing the likelihood of an effective green steel transition.

Profit Margins<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Low-carbon steel plants are expensive. On average, building a low-carbon steel plant costs between USD 600-800 million per million tons of steel capacity per year. Fully retrofitting an existing BF-BOF plant with the same capacity only costs around a third of that. The steel industry has rather low levels of profit, in some countries only around 5-10%. That makes it difficult to deal with the increasing costs or to independently afford new investments without risking a loss of market shares. The decarbonization of the steel industry, however, will require significant amounts of capital for new investments, for example to cover the costs associated with new facilities, infrastructure, resources, and training of professionals. The lack of capital available, in combination with the high costs, therefore, creates a direct obstacle to the transition.

Profit Margins<separator>Access to Financial Resources<separator>Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Because other emissions-intensive industries, too, face increasing costs from decarbonization efforts - and because government funds are finite - it is difficult to cover all the costs with government investments only. Generally, we should, therefore, assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. However, at the current stage, there are several reasons such institutions may not want to invest in the steel industry, making it almost impossible for plant owners to transition even if they wanted to: The lack of profitability caused by green premiums and overcapacity, potentially poor credit histories if the industry is asked to shut down BF-BOF plants before achieving profitability, and distrust in the market and the future of returns on investment. Moreover, many of the costs are upfront and focused, increasing investment risks and requiring very strong business cases to be persuasive for investors. While profit margins of and investments in low-carbon steel remain low, steel producers will continue to lack financial resources to invest in green steel production.

Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Investors<separator>The lack of market security might make it impossible to fund a low-carbon or green steel venture in the first place: Because the cost of construction for new plants is very high, most steel companies are dependent on significant amounts of capital from banks, governments, or private investors. Most of them, however, are unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel if it is unsure that such projects become profitable.

Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>If customers are not interested in buying low-carbon steel, or are not willing to pay for the higher prices associated with low-carbon and green steel, a transition will result in declining profitability. It is unrealistic to believe that shareholders will allow a steel company’s board to make a decision that results in lower profitability if they do not have to due to other factors. Instead, they are more likely to reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking.

Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>The lack of market security might make it impossible to fund a low-carbon or green steel venture in the first place: Because the cost of construction for new plants is very high, most steel companies are dependent on significant amounts of capital from banks, governments, or private investors. Most of them, however, are unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel if it is unsure that such projects become profitable. Similarly, it is less likely that there is sufficient investment into low-carbon steelmaking technologies while demand for the product remains low.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Access to Financial Resources<separator>Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Because other emissions-intensive industries, too, face increasing costs from decarbonization efforts - and because government funds are finite - it is difficult to cover all the costs with government investments only. Generally, we should, therefore, assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. However, at the current stage, there are several reasons such institutions may not want to invest in the steel industry, making it almost impossible for plant owners to transition even if they wanted to: The lack of profitability caused by green premiums and overcapacity, potentially poor credit histories if the industry is asked to shut down BF-BOF plants before achieving profitability, and distrust in the market and the future of returns on investment. Moreover, many of the costs are upfront and focused, increasing investment risks and requiring very strong business cases to be persuasive for investors. The lack of competitiveness and market security, therefore, make it more difficult for steel plant owners to access financial resources.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>The higher cost for low-carbon steel, created by the green premium and scarcity, reduces its competitiveness. The resulting lack of low-carbon steel demand and market security might result in low levels of green steel production. With little supply and without the benefits of the economies of scale, low-carbon and green steel prices increase, making it even more difficult to find buyers and remain profitable. Without expected profitability, steel companies are more likely to reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking instead.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Regulators<separator>The initial low competitiveness of low-carbon steel can limit regulators' abilities to increase demand and hence market security, for example through public procurement policies or requirements towards steel consumers (such as to decarbonize their supply chains). That is, because a requirement to pay the high cost of low-carbon steel may cause damage to vital national economies, resulting in, for example, negative impacts on constituents' support in elections. Without political support, however, politicians will struggle to enforce their long-term decarbonization strategies, reducing the likelihood of an effective green steel transition.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Customers<separator>For industries consuming large amounts of steel, the price difference between emissions-intensive and low-carbon steel may be significant, as they will be the ones asked to initially pay for the green premium. To retain their profitability, the most intuitive decision is to stick with cheap, coal-based steel, reinforcing emissions-intensive steel production.

Excessive Government Intervention<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Because steel growth and production are not market driven, there is a lower amount of predictability and information available about the future market. Governments might change their strategy spontaneously, for example when they feel threatened by military powers, as steel is especially in demand for security during periods of militarization or economic growth. In such times, previous sustainability ideas and policies may be neglected, highlighting the potential tradeoff between steel security and sustainability. Excessive government intervention and sporadic decision-making can, therefore, reinforce the lack of information for other relevant stakeholders.

Excessive Government Intervention<separator>Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator>The demand for steel is projected to continue growing by approximately a third by 2050. Because of this demand, and the need of steel for military security and economic development, regulators are unlikely to ban or impose harmful restrictions to emissions-intensive steel production until low-carbon steel has a higher availability and affordability. Moreover, it is a reason for governments to continue investing and financially supporting national steel growth and independence, despite global overcapacity. This dependency on steel production for economic growth and security reduces pressure and accountability for emissions-intensive steel plants, offering protection throughout the transition.

Excessive Government Intervention<separator>Overcapacity<separator>For many decades, governments around the world have intervened in the steel industry to ensure their country has and retains large amounts of steel capacity. Such interventions include plant ownership, the provision of low-interest loans, grants, tax benefits, and excessive subsidies. Even though such interventions effectively caused the fast growth of steel capacity, this growth was not market-based. Therefore, the global supply now significantly exceeds the global demand, a phenomenon called “overcapacity”.

Overcapacity<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Overcapacity implies that the current steel supply is higher than the current demand, and the continued government interventions and announced constructions imply that this trend will continue in the future. Because of that, there is little demand for additional steel, especially if it is more expensive than the current (very cheap) emissions-intensive type. This price difference is caused by the green-premium (which makes low-carbon steel more expensive), and by overcapacity (which causes the dumping of cheap steel on the international market). This, in turn, results in low levels of competitiveness for low-carbon and green steel.

Overcapacity<separator>International Cooperation<separator>The steel industry is highly globalized, and overcapacity causes international trade friction and economic inefficiency. China, which is an example of extraordinary amounts of government intervention and ownership of steel plants, created so much excess capacity that it started dumping very cheap steel in other markets around the world. Often this made it difficult for local plants to compete, causing economic losses or even bankruptcy. This results in countries' use of tariffs and economic sanctions towards each others' steel sectors, increasing tensions, and reducing the potential for collaborative international relations. Overcapacity is a global problem, and one that has to be addressed on a global level, for example through international agreements. The lack of international cooperation, therefore, also perpetuates the issue of overcapacity.

Overcapacity<separator>Lifetime and Reinvestment Cycles<separator>The long lifetimes cause a very slow turnover of steel facilities. This is reinforced by the steel overcapacity, which lessens the construction of newer - potentially low-carbon - plants.

Steel Plant Construction Cost<separator>Investors<separator>The net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Generally, we should assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. However, at the current stage, there are several reasons such institutions may not want to invest in the steel industry, making it almost impossible for plant owners to transition even if they wanted to: The lack of profitability caused by green premiums and overcapacity, potentially poor credit histories if the industry is asked to shut down BF-BOF plants before achieving profitability, and distrust in the market and the future of returns on investment. Moreover, many of the costs are upfront and focused, increasing investment risks and requiring very strong business cases to be persuasive for investors.

Steel Plant Construction Cost<separator>Profit Margins<separator>Low-carbon steel plants are expensive. On average, building a low-carbon steel plant costs between USD 600-800 million per million tons of capacity per year. Fully retrofitting an existing BF-BOF plant with the same capacity only costs around a third of that. The steel industry has rather low levels of profit, in some countries only around 5-10%. That makes it difficult to deal with the increasing costs or to independently afford new investments without risking a loss of market shares. During repayment periods for loans, and the potentially lower profits in during the initial investments (for example caused by lower demand for low-carbon steel in particular), investments in new steel plant constructions may even further reduce a steel company's profit margins.

Lifetime and Reinvestment Cycles<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Investment decisions are generally made toward the end of a plant’s lifetime or before the reinvestment cycle. At that point, it is the expected profitability of carbon-heavy versus low-carbon steel - as well as the existing technologies available - that determine if a plant owner continues with the current production route or switches. If new low-carbon technologies are only implemented in new steel plants or at the time of reinvestment, then this reduces the speed at which they are developed, tested, and scaled.

Access to Financial Resources<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Because other emissions-intensive industries, too, face increasing costs from decarbonization efforts - and because government funds are finite - it is difficult to cover all the costs with government investments only. Generally, we should, therefore, assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. However, at the current stage, there are several reasons such institutions may not want to invest in the steel industry, making it almost impossible for plant owners to transition even if they wanted to: The lack of profitability caused by green premiums and overcapacity, potentially poor credit histories if the industry is asked to shut down BF-BOF plants before achieving profitability, and distrust in the market and the future of returns on investment. Moreover, many of the costs are upfront and focused, increasing investment risks and requiring very strong business cases to be persuasive for investors. This leads to costly and high-risk investments, with potentially low returns. Often, the lack of access to financial resources may then be a primary reason to not invest in low-carbon steelmaking.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Technology Standards<separator>To expand the development and use of low-carbon technologies, we require agreed-upon technology standards regarding the new technologies’ sustainability, performance, reliability, and durability. This lack of standards, procedures, and guidelines created challenges to the scaling of technologies, making large-scale adoption more difficult. If technologies are not yet available and implemented, it is likely that no (or only few) standards are created. On the other hand, without standards these technologies are hard to evaluate and implement by steel plant owners in the first place.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Investors<separator>Most steel companies are dependent on significant amounts of capital from banks, governments, or private investors. Most of them, however, are unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel (including its low-carbon breakthrough technologies) if they are unsure that such projects can become profitable. Similarly, it is less likely that there is sufficient investment into low-carbon steelmaking technologies while demand for the product remains low. It can be seen as a self-fulfilling prophecy, in which low demand causes low investments, which continues low usage and demand.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>For plant owners, it is essential that the information and maturity timelines are available and reliable. It would, for example, make little sense to equip their plants with CCUS capabilities now, if they know that green hydrogen will be available and affordable by 2030, as CCUS would not be needed for a green-hydrogen-driven plant. This highlights the importance of focusing on essential breakthrough technologies and their development’s acceleration to promote awareness and information availability.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Trained Professionals<separator>We cannot train people for something that has not yet been developed or implemented much. Similarly, we cannot create low-carbon technologies without qualified staff that can work on the research and development, and that can implement and maintain it.

Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator>Steel Plant Construction Cost<separator>If the relevant infrastructure is not within geographical proximity, it may cause the relocation of steel plants, or at least incentivize the continuation of emissions-intensive practices. It may also reduce profitability, as the construction of infrastructure by a steel plant would be highly expensive. Relocation may take away existing competitive advantages such as access to iron ore, skilled labor, or other resources, further reducing the profitability of low-carbon steel producers. If low-carbon infrastructure is not yet available, it needs to be built, increasing the cost of green steel plant constructions even more.

Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator>Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>Some energy resources, like green hydrogen, require infrastructure, such as hydrogen production-, storage-, and distribution facilities. Given the low levels of hydrogen production, all of them will need to be expanded greatly to provide sufficient resources and bring them to the steel plants. Without the development and expansion of the energy itself, however, the interest to invest into the relevant infrastructure is low. Without the infrastructure available, however, the energy type cannot be distributed as needed. On a similar note, renewable energy production facilities are not sufficient for a transition if we do not prepare for high-voltage electricity transmission and storage infrastructure.

Trained Professionals<separator>Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>To run low-carbon steel plants and support the construction and functioning of enabling factors - such as the production and distribution of green energy and high quality iron ore - we need qualified staff. Without such, there may be further resource scarcity.

Trained Professionals<separator>Regulators<separator>The construction and maintenance of steel plants and enabling infrastructure requires an increasing number of trained people, which can only be served with greater numbers of educational institutions for the field, or at least the inclusion of such fields into current curriculums. This is highly interrelated with conditions for the growth of other fields, like the growth of hydrogen and renewable energy. The lack of trained professionals may, therefore, inhibit the execution of regulators' policies and strategies on various levels relevant to the green transition.

Trained Professionals<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator>To run low-carbon steel plants and support the construction and functioning of enabling factors - such as enabling infrastructure - we need qualified staff.

Trained Professionals<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>We cannot train people for something that has not yet been developed or implemented much. Similarly, we cannot create low-carbon technologies without qualified staff that can work on the research and development, and that can implement and maintain it.

Green Steel Definition<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>The lack of a distinction prevents steel producers and primary and secondary consumers from marketing their products appropriately. A clear definition would allow net-zero steel producers to communicate their efforts and gain a competitive advantage, thus increasing profitability. Moreover, emissions-intensive steel could not market itself as green anymore, potentially losing customers over time, which may incentivize a change in the production method towards low-carbon steelmaking. The lack of a green steel definition can, therefore, directly reinforce the lack of competitiveness of low-carbon steel production.

Green Steel Definition<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Without a clear and enforced definition, the industry allows steel with slightly fewer carbon emissions - although still being far from net zero - to be labeled as green steel. This reduces the effectiveness of market incentives, as consumers and investors are dealing with imperfect information, struggling to identify which products have a low carbon footprint or to evaluate the price-performance ratio. The lack of transparency, caused by the absence of a clear definition, and certification, poses a challenge to the decarbonization of other industries. Without an understanding of the actual emissions of steel, consumers like the automotive industry may struggle to distinguish between net zero and low-carbon steel, reducing their ability to successfully decarbonize their own supply chains.

Green Steel Definition<separator>International Cooperation<separator>To write effective decarbonization policies, or even engage in international trade of green steel, it requires clear standards and certifications. Both, however, are difficult to create without fixed definitions of what makes steel “green”. This may lead to the co-existence of several, but inherently different, certifications. Additionally, the lack of a quantified definition and distinction between different carbon intensities of steel products makes the enforcement of decarbonization policies, emission regulations, and carbon pricing schemes more difficult. Without international cooperation, it is difficult to achieve international market incentives promoting green steel sufficiently to overcome other challenges, too, such as the lack of competitiveness for low-carbon steel.
Green Steel Definition<separator>Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator>The lack of a distinction prevents steel producers and primary and secondary consumers from marketing their products appropriately. A clear definition would allow net-zero steel producers to communicate their efforts and gain a competitive advantage, thus increasing profitability. Moreover, emissions-intensive steel could not market itself as green anymore, potentially losing customers over time, which may incentivize a change in the production method towards low-carbon steelmaking. Without a clear definition it is, therefore, difficult to hold producers accountable for achieving green steel production targets.
Technology Standards<separator>Bureaucratic Barriers<separator>Steel plants are complex and their planning and construction take several years. Frequently, the process is prolonged even further by long waiting times to receive construction permits and other required licenses. As many low-carbon technologies are rather novel or do not yet have technology standards implemented, the bureaucratic process and approval time may take even longer.

Technology Standards<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>The determination and enforcement of technology standards is particularly important now, as many steel producers started to determine their transition strategies, including the technologies they might use. Uncertainty about the acceptance and effectiveness of technologies may slow this process and hence the transition, and also makes it more difficult for regulators and customers to evaluate the sustainability of the steelmaking process.

Technology Standards<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>To expand the development and use of low-carbon technologies, we require agreed-upon technology standards regarding the new technologies’ sustainability, performance, reliability, and durability. This lack of standards, procedures, and guidelines created challenges to the scaling of technologies, making large-scale adoption more difficult. If technologies are not yet available and implemented, it is likely that no (or only few) standards are created. On the other hand, without standards these technologies are hard to evaluate and implement by steel plant owners in the first place.

Bureaucratic Barriers<separator>Access to Financial Resources<separator>Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Generally, we should assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. High bureaucratic barriers can limit financial access, as it may be more difficult to secure funding without permits and reliable timelines for construction and production.

Bureaucratic Barriers<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Steel plants are complex and their planning and construction take several years. Frequently, the process is prolonged even further by long waiting times to receive construction permits and other required licenses. As many low-carbon technologies are rather novel, the bureaucratic process and approval time may take even longer. If permits and licenses cannot be (or are at the risk of not being) received in time, steel plant owners may choose to reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking instead.

Bureaucratic Barriers<separator>Investors<separator>High bureaucratic barriers can limit financial access, as it may be more difficult to secure funding without permits and reliable timelines for construction and production.

Bureaucratic Barriers<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Infrastructure<separator>CCUS technologies are essential for the short-term reduction of carbon emissions. Nevertheless, their adoption is slowed greatly by high bureaucratic barriers. Often, it requires sequestration and transportation licenses and is associated with continuous safety monitoring that may require new staff, resources, and consistent interaction with relevant government departments. Without the administrative support (if not active promotion) to reduce bureaucratic barriers to relevant technologies (hydrogen, CCUS, etc.), the relevant infrastructure will be built too slowly to encourage a transition before the upcoming reinvestment cycle.

Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Without disclosure of steel plants' decarbonization efforts and achievements, it is difficult to evaluate the progress made in relation to the targets set, and hence to hold plant owners accountable. Additionally, the lack of accountability creates further insecurity for other stakeholders, who are dealing with imperfect information to make decisions about purchasing and investing. This may then reinforce the lack of competitiveness of low-carbon steel.

Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator>Investors<separator>In many countries, there are rarely any consequences for steel companies that do not fulfill their CO2 goals - especially those more ambitious than national carbon reduction targets. This poses a challenge: Often the simple announcement of ambitious climate targets improves a steel company’s access to funding and public perception. However, there are no accountability measures that ensure that such plans are actually implemented. Investors' choices to invest based on announcements, but without accountability measures, makes market incentives less effective, slowing the transition.

International Cooperation<separator>Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Currently, we have no international agreements that determine how to transform the steel industry on a global scale. Changes are mainly driven by national laws and international market forces, which, however, due to the many ongoing market failures are rather unlikely to achieve the desired reductions by 2050. Because strategies are not aligned with each other, and some information not publicly shared, the unilateral nature of current decarbonization efforts limit awareness on the international level and for relevant stakeholders (producers, consumers, investors, etc.).

International Cooperation<separator>Access to Financial Resources<separator>In many cases, developing countries require extensive support, for example through increased access to funding, green materials, and technologies, or even with specific infrastructure developments. International cooperation will be necessary to allow for a competitive market, good accountability measures, to coordinate effective action, and to guide relevant stakeholders such as international financial institutions and trade cooperations. Factors such as the lack of an international green steel definition, little information about national steel decarbonization roadmaps, and low-profitability caused by (at least partially) global overcapacity reduce the incentives for international investors to finance steel endeavors, thus reinforcing the lack of access to financial resources.

International Cooperation<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Currently, we have no international agreements that determine how to transform the steel industry on a global scale. Changes are mainly driven by national laws and international market forces, which, however, due to the many ongoing market failures are rather unlikely to achieve the desired reductions by 2050. However, due to the international nature of the industry, it is difficult for one country to transition without the risk of “carbon leakage”, which refers to the process in which a company moves to a location with lower compliance (i.e., carbon) costs to remain competitive.

International Cooperation<separator>Green Energy and Resource Availability<separator>In many cases, developing countries require extensive support, for example through increased access to funding, green materials, and technologies, or even with specific infrastructure developments. To run EAFs, for example, we need large amounts of renewables and other low-carbon energy, which requires great changes in energy infrastructure. Without extensive  international cooperation and support targeting the steel industry and enabling industries (like the renewable energy sector and energy distribution infrastructure), it is difficult for many countries to access the necessary resources and achieve their targets.

International Cooperation<separator>Overcapacity<separator>The steel industry is highly globalized, and overcapacity causes international trade friction and economic inefficiency. China, which is an example of extraordinary amounts of government intervention and ownership of steel plants, created so much excess capacity that it started dumping very cheap steel in other markets around the world. Often this made it difficult for local plants to compete, causing economic losses or even bankruptcy. This results in countries' use of tariffs and economic sanctions towards each others' steel sectors, increasing tensions, and reducing the potential for collaborative international relations. Overcapacity is a global problem, and one that has to be addressed on a global level, for example through international agreements. The lack of international cooperation, therefore, also perpetuates the issue of overcapacity.

International Cooperation<separator>Investors<separator>International cooperation will be necessary to allow for a competitive market, good accountability measures, to coordinate effective action, and to guide relevant stakeholders such as international financial institutions and trade cooperations. It is particularly important to support directing funds towards those countries that could not afford the green steel transition on their own. Factors such as the lack of an international green steel definition, little information about national steel decarbonization roadmaps, and low-profitability caused by (at least partially) global overcapacity reduce the incentives for international investors to finance steel endeavors.

International Cooperation<separator>Green Steel Definition<separator>To write effective decarbonization policies, or even engage in international trade of green steel, it requires clear standards and certifications. Both, however, are difficult to create without fixed definitions of what makes steel “green”. This may lead to the co-existence of several, but inherently different, certifications. Additionally, the lack of a quantified definition and distinction between different carbon intensities of steel products makes the enforcement of decarbonization policies, emission regulations, and carbon pricing schemes more difficult. Without international cooperation, it is difficult to achieve international market incentives promoting green steel sufficiently to overcome other challenges, too, such as the lack of competitiveness for low-carbon steel.

International Cooperation<separator>Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator> Even if countries pledge extensive reductions in BF-BOF capacity and emissions more generally, there are few consequences for deviating from such plans. China, for example, vowed that 60% of its steel capacity would be upgraded to reduce pollution and emission levels. They also started identifying underutilized plants to reduce the emissions caused by their high levels of overcapacity. But despite such promises, they continue to invest in new BF-BOF steel plants and missed both their plant upgrading and emission targets. If steel decarbonization policies remain a unilateral matter, implementing accountability measures will be difficult.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Accountability to Steel Decarbonization<separator> Without disclosure of steel plants' decarbonization efforts and achievements, it is difficult to evaluate the progress made in relation to the targets set, and hence to hold plant owners accountable. Additionally, the lack of accountability creates further insecurity for other stakeholders, who are dealing with imperfect information to make decisions about purchasing and investing. This may then reinforce the lack of competitiveness of low-carbon steel.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Civil Society<separator>A lack of awareness by civil society impacts their ability to tailor their consumer choices and voting behavior towards actions that support the steel decarbonization. For example, few people are aware of the carbon intensities of steel, and even more, what type of steel is used in the goods they buy. With greater awareness of the climate issues associated with steel and the types of low-carbon steel that exist, as well as better transparency of the types of steel used in goods such as cars, machines, and household ware, individuals have the chance to make low-emission steel a consideration in their purchasing decisions. Opting for low-CO2 steel sends a clear signal to producers, which are then incentivized to decarbonize their supply chains and strengthen the low-carbon and green steel market.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Customers<separator>To decarbonize their own supply chains, the main consumer industries of steel need to be aware of the emissions inherent to the steel products they buy. This helps them in understanding the need to switch to low-carbon steel products in the first place, the demand for and procurement of which may strengthen the market. Although many have gained an increased understanding of the matter, there is still a lack of information about the availability of different types of low-carbon steel. The absence of a consistent certification and distinctions between low-carbon steels exacerbates this, as it is difficult to easily compare the emissions associated with each product. Without this information buyers can struggle to identify the steel with the lowest emissions and continue to buy high-emission steel, perpetuating the demand for non-green products.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Steel companies will need to make many decisions about future production pathways and investments in the upcoming years. One of the reasons they struggle to do so quickly is because of the many ambiguities caused by imperfect information. The lack of long-term strategies by governments and inconsistency in policy direction makes planning difficult. If, for example, it is unsure if CCUS will be accepted as carbon-reduction technology, plant owners will be waiting for a decision before deciding to implement them. This delays current emission reduction efforts. If there is no transparency about the financial opportunities available or market security provided for low-carbon and green steel companies, fewer will opt for such investments. Another essential information for good planning by steel producers is the availability of new technologies and what changes in infrastructure, hiring, and training their implementation requires. There should be a continuous exchange of information about the options plant owners have, the political decisions made, and how regulations will impact the different pathway’s economic outcomes, so that plant owners can create financially feasible plans to achieve decarbonization and do not reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking instead.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Investors<separator>The underreporting of steel production types and the respective emissions created also make it more difficult for public and private institutions to make investment decisions. At the moment, those wanting to increase financial access for low-emission companies need to rely on accurate self-reporting of emissions or some kind of low-carbon certifications. The Science-Based Target initiative is one such certification, vouching that companies created and committed to science-based reduction targets. However, it is currently difficult to identify which ones met the announced goals or to evaluate companies not yet part of such initiatives, making green investment choices, or the creation of effective investment standards for steel, more unlikely.

Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>The higher cost for low-carbon steel, created by the green premium and scarcity, reduces its competitiveness. The resulting lack of low-carbon steel demand and market security might result in low levels of green steel production. With little supply and without the benefits of the economies of scale, low-carbon and green steel prices increase, making it even more difficult to find buyers and remain profitable. Without expected profitability, steel companies are more likely to reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking instead.

Customers<separator>Steel Recycling Capacity<separator>The steel industry is frequently limited by the lack of holistic and efficient collection systems and a lack of sorting, which requires a better collaboration between steel companies and their customers. Without such a collaboration, recycling rates cannot be maximized.

Customers<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>For industries consuming large amounts of steel, the price difference between emissions-intensive and low-carbon steel may be significant, as they will be the ones asked to initially pay for the green premium. To retain their profitability, the most intuitive decision is to stick with cheap, coal-based steel, reinforcing emissions-intensive steel production.

Customers<separator>Growing steel demand<separator>The demand for steel is projected to continue growing by approximately a third by 2050. If no low-carbon processes are adopted, we will see a similar trend for resulting GHG emissions. Because of international attempts to increase economic growth, customers are likely to continue buying more (and cheap) steel.

Customers<separator>Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Without sufficient demand signals (for green steel) by customers, steel producers continue to be unsure about the profitability and market security of low-carbon steel, making them less likely to invest in low-carbon steel production plants.

Customers<separator>Investors<separator>Without sufficient demand signals (for green steel) by customers, investors continue to be unsure about the profitability of low-carbon steel, making them less likely to invest in low-carbon steel production plants.

Regulators<separator>Excessive Government Intervention<separator> For many decades, governments around the world have intervened in the steel industry to ensure their country has and retains large amounts of steel capacity. Such interventions include plant ownership, the provision of low-interest loans, grants, tax benefits, and excessive subsidies. Even though such interventions effectively caused the fast growth of steel capacity, this growth was not market-based, causing overcapacity.

Regulators<separator>Steel Recycling Capacity<separator>Scrap can either be re-melted and retrofitted to become a new product, or it can be reused directly when still of good quality. However, despite the high potential of direct reuse, its actual rate is currently low as it requires good documentation and labeling of the steel products to ensure quality and safety. Standards for such labeling and documentation are, in most countries, not in place, making it difficult to maximize recycling rates.

Regulators<separator>Customers<separator>Without economic or legal incentives to decarbonize, for example through carbon pricing, large steel consumers are less likely to decarbonize their supply chains, thus promoting green steel demand.

Regulators<separator>Investors<separator>Without the creation of green steel definitions, market incentives for low-carbon steel, and green investment criteria, market dynamics favoring coal-based steel production are unlikely to change and investors thus less likely to switch to investments into low-carbon steel.

Regulators<separator>Technology Standards<separator>The steel industry can learn from other industries’ lessons and prevent similar challenges through early preparation and institutions that determine and enforce technology standards. The renewable energy sector, for example, faced difficulties to expand quickly, partially because of a lack of agreed-upon technology standards regarding new technologies’ performance, reliability, and durability. This lack of standards, procedures, and guidelines created challenges to the scaling of technologies, making large-scale adoption more difficult.

Regulators<separator>Green Steel Definition<separator>There are various definitions of “green” or “sustainable” steel, often failing to distinguish between net-zero, low-carbon, and less-than-before-carbon steel. Even within organizations and political strategies, terminologies are frequently used interchangeably. To write effective decarbonization policies, or even engage in international trade of green steel, it requires international collaboration by regulators to set clear standards and certifications. Both, however, are difficult to create without fixed definitions of what makes steel “green”. This may lead to the co-existence of several, but inherently different, certifications.

Investors<separator>Customers<separator>Without sufficient demand signals (for green steel) by customers, investors continue to be unsure about the profitability of low-carbon steel, making them less likely to invest in low-carbon steel production plants.

Investors<separator>Access to Financial Resources<separator>Because of the high costs associated with switching the production route, the net-zero transition of the steel industry will likely require an additional annual investment of USD 8-11 billion, an equivalent to USD 235-335 billion by 2050. The only way to afford this will be with extensive help from governments, banks, and investors. Because other emissions-intensive industries, too, face increasing costs from decarbonization efforts - and because government funds are finite - it is difficult to cover all the costs with government investments only. Generally, we should, therefore, assume that banks and private investors - who are already the largest source of capital for the steel industry - will have to play a significant role in this transition. Without changing investment priorities, for example by reducing investments in emissions-intensive companies, green steel producers will continue to lack access to the necessary financial resources to transition.

Investors<separator>Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Most steel companies are dependent on significant amounts of capital from banks, governments, or private investors. Most of them, however, are unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel (including its low-carbon breakthrough technologies) if they are unsure that such projects can become profitable. Similarly, it is less likely that there is sufficient investment into low-carbon steelmaking technologies while demand for the product remains low. It can be seen as a self-fulfilling prophecy, in which low demand causes low investments, which continues low usage and demand.

Civil Society<separator>Customers<separator>Without changes in purchasing decisions (e.g., to buy products made of green steel), primary customers are less likely to feel pressured into decarbonizing their supply chain, including steel.

Civil Society<separator>Regulators<separator>Without changes in voting behavior and/or political action, regulators are less likely to put steel decarbonization on their political agenda and act upon it.

Civil Society<separator>Investors<separator>Without changes in investment choices and demands by civil society, investors and banks are unlikely to adapt their investment standards to greener choices, perpetuating investments in emissions-intensive steel production.



Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>The higher cost for low-carbon steel, created by the green premium and scarcity, causes a reinforcing feedback loop. Without intervention, low-carbon steel is unlikely to become competitive quickly, creating a high uncertainty in the market. A lack of low-carbon steel demand and market security might result in low levels of low-carbon and green steel production. With little supply and without the benefits of the economies of scale, low-carbon and green steel prices increase, making it even more difficult to find buyers and remain profitable. It is estimated that the initial green premium associated with low-carbon ironmaking is between 15-40% of the original production cost. Because this additional cost exceeds most steel companies’ profit margins, such an endeavor is only possible if they can sell the low-carbon steel at higher prices. Within such a competitive globalized market, this will put producers at risk, as they will be competing with cheaper emissions-intensive steel. The combination of market insecurity and low competitiveness creates a “first-mover disadvantage”. If manufacturers are unsure if they can sell the low-emission steel for a higher price, they will be unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel production, delaying the transition.

Competitiveness of Low-Emissions Steel<separator>Market Security for Low-Emissions Steel<separator>The higher cost for low-carbon steel, created by the green premium and scarcity, causes a reinforcing feedback loop. Without intervention, low-carbon steel is unlikely to become competitive quickly, creating a high uncertainty in the market. A lack of low-carbon steel demand and market security might result in low levels of low-carbon and green steel production. With little supply and without the benefits of the economies of scale, low-carbon and green steel prices increase, making it even more difficult to find buyers and remain profitable. It is estimated that the initial green premium associated with low-carbon ironmaking is between 15-40% of the original production cost. Because this additional cost exceeds most steel companies’ profit margins, such endeavor is only possible if they can sell the low-carbon steel at higher prices. Within such a competitive globalized market, this will put producers at risk, as they will be competing with cheaper emissions-intensive steel. The combination of market insecurity and low competitiveness creates a “first-mover disadvantage”. If manufacturers are unsure if they can sell the low-emission steel for a higher price, they will be unlikely to invest in low-carbon steel production, delaying the transition.

Overcapacity<separator>Profit Margins<separator>With a current global overcapacity of 25% and growing, many steel plants are only operating at low levels of capacity, with an average of 75% in the main steel-producing countries. However, such low operation levels risk the viability of a steel plant: To remain profitable, steel plants need to operate at, on average, 80-90%. The current state thus results in economic losses from reduced profits. The steel industry is highly globalized, and overcapacity causes international trade friction and economic inefficiency. China, which is an example of extraordinary amounts of government intervention and ownership of steel plants, created so much excess capacity that it started dumping very cheap steel in other markets around the world. At times this made it difficult for local plants to compete, causing economic losses or even bankruptcy.

Availability of Low-Emissions Technologies<separator>Steel companies reinvest in emissions-intensive steelmaking<separator>By 2050, the adoption of Best Available Technologies and breakthrough technologies could reduce around 90% of the industry’s direct emissions, if the expected maturity timelines for new technologies are met. At the moment, however, many technologies are still under development and not yet scalable. Because breakthrough technologies are a necessary enabling factor for low-carbon steelmaking, their absence by the time of reinvestment may force steel companies to reinvest in emissions-intensive steel instead. Additionally, low-carbon technologies are expensive. Although the price of new technologies is expected to decrease over time, it will be substantially higher than existing technologies for at least another decade. Because of that, the costs of zero- and near-zero steel plants may be up to 90% higher than the costs of traditional BF-BOF plants, which is difficult to stem for plant owners with low profit margins.

Awareness and Information Availability<separator>Regulators<separator>For governments to create effective policies, they need to have an understanding of how their country’s industry is producing steel, who is causing how many emissions per ton of steel produced, and what the challenges to the national companies’ transitions are. They also need to be aware of the opportunities for change. However, many governments currently lack such information.When proposing the construction of a new iron or steel plant, companies are frequently not required to report the production pathway they choose, but only how much steel they will produce once operating. That makes it difficult for governments to limit the construction of emissions-intensive steel plants, or to create other regulatory policies that would require such projects to reduce their emissions through other measures. Some governments seem to lack an in-depth understanding of the need to decarbonize the steel industry through changes on many levels, and not just within the industry itself. Some examples are the necessity for regulations in building codes, and engineering and construction practices, as well as economic incentives for steel consumers to change their product designs and procurement choices to enable a fast and effective transition. At the moment, there is no specific goal and plan for how to achieve it. Instead, there are several ideas that serve as broad guidelines and ideas. Making such a plan should be a priority for each country. However, it needs a deep understanding of the interconnection between steel producers, steel consumers, the market, and political failures, to develop policies that identify leverage points and address systemic barriers. Evidence-based policymaking depends on information, and thus without such, it is unlikely to succeed.Several organizations started to acknowledge the gaps in information and started to track the estimated emissions of the global steel fleet, as well as the plants currently existing or being planned. This includes the Global Steel Plant Tracker and the Green Steel Tracker. Nevertheless, governments may want to develop further structures to report steel production and emissions, to improve their understanding of the national fleet and how to best support it in its transition. Even further, they may want to identify other organizations working on the various challenges of the steel transition, to create effective collaborative partnerships. And lastly, they will want to know the strategies other countries choose to decarbonize their own industries to ensure international competitiveness. The lack of awareness and information, therefore, inhibits planning and active implementation of decarbonization policies on several levels.
